Document-ID: yyy Versjon: 1
Procedure – Preparedness and security of aquaculture activity 
 
Sist godkjent dato 14.04.2020 (Adam Lillicrap) 
Dokumentansvarlig Maria Hultman 
 
28.04.2022 12:58:56  
1/3
1 AREA OF USE  
This is related to aquaculture activity at NIVA, primarily related to organisms kept in climate 
room R1, R2, R3 and R4. 
2 PRINCIPLES  
This procedure describes how NIVA ensures that holding of test organisms follow 
“aktivitetsforskriften” and animal welfare rules. 
3 RESPONSIBILITY 
 As per instrument responsible list (GLP 001 B004).  
 
Project leader (PL) has responsibility of planning setup of test systems and contingency plans. 
 
Management has responsibility of ensuring study plans are in compliance with rules and 
regulations. 
 
4 DEFINITIONS  
Not applicable.  
5 CHEMICALS AND SOLUTIONS 
Not applicable.  
 
6 INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT 
Climate rooms R1, R2, R3 and R4 are used for GLP purposes and non GLP purposes. Climate 
room R2 is used exclusively for culturing purposes, while R3 and R4 are used for testing. 
Climate room R1 can be used for both culturing and testing. Use of climate rooms is regulated 
according to SOP X58 (Document-ID 17423) 
 
 
7 PROCEDURE  
During the working days, the dedicated areas for culturing, handling and testing aquatic 
animals will be checked. All staff is trained to work with aquatic organisms, including fish. 
Checking consists of confirming that all measurements for maintaining animal welfare are 
documented, such as oxygen level, cleanness, temperature and light. Animals are fed according 
to study plan or test system plan. A logbook is kept next to each culturing system and all 
measured conditions are registered.  
 
Document-ID: yyy Versjon: 1
Procedure – Preparedness and security of aquaculture activity 
 
Sist godkjent dato 14.04.2020 (Adam Lillicrap) 
Dokumentansvarlig Maria Hultman 
 
28.04.2022 12:58:56  
2/3
In the event of observed deviations in any culture or ongoing test, such as: visible degradation 
in water quality, mortality or erratic behavior of any cultured animal, the PL will be 
immediately contacted. His/her name is stated in the study plan, as well on a sign attached to 
the front door of each climate room. The PL has appointed deputies in case his/her absence. 
 
 
 
7.1 Animal welfare 
The main risk to animal welfare lies in climate rooms experiencing: 
 
1. Electrical power failure 
Electrical power failure in Ø94 is notified by SMS to climate rooms responsible person, who 
will contact PL. The PL will then initiate contingency plans necessary, depending of the length 
of power failure. Whenever the main power supply is restored after a power failure, the PL will 
visit the climate room and check if all power-dependent equipment has restored their functions. 
 
2. Failure of cooling systems in climate rooms 
The climate rooms have programmable steering of light and temperature. Alarm is given 
automatically by SMS to climate room responsible in case of deviations of programmed 
temperature. It is the climate room responsible person task to alert individual PLs of any 
deviations from set points in climate rooms. PL will then implement appropriate needed 
contingency plans.  
 
3. Stop of water flow in test systems with flow through conditions. 
It is the PL responsibility to plan and implement contingency actions in case of stop of water 
flow for test systems. There are now many commercial devices that can detect changes in 
water level and report this to specific persons via emails or SMS to mobile telephone. The PL 
should ensure that a suitable device is installed. 
 
4. Stop of air flow 
Air flow is often used to ensure optimal oxygen saturation in test systems. The climate rooms 
have a pressurized air system, driven by electrical compressor. If this fails, we have electrical 
aquaria air pumps that can substitute the compressors. The PL should be alarmed in case of 
failing airflow and initiate contingency plans. 
 
7.2 Disease spread 
For some test systems there may be a risk of spreading disease from test systems. A risk 
assessment has been performed on all relevant species and those that pose an eventual risk has 
been identified (SOP “Disinfection”, Appendix 1).  A procedure (SOP “Disinfection”) 
(Document-ID: yy) is implemented when any of these organisms are present at NIVA. 
 
7.3 Accidental happenings 
It is conceivable that organisms test containers break or accidental lose their content to the 
floor of the climate rooms. The climate rooms do not have floor drains, therefore any spill from 
test container will be contained with each climate room. The door sill of climate room range 5 
cm above floor level, so no water will run outside the room. If water is from organisms in the 
Document-ID: yyy Versjon: 1
Procedure – Preparedness and security of aquaculture activity 
 
Sist godkjent dato 14.04.2020 (Adam Lillicrap) 
Dokumentansvarlig Maria Hultman 
 
28.04.2022 12:58:56  
3/3
risk category, then appropriate amount of chlorine should be added to the water spill prior to 
clearing away the water. 
 
 
8 MAINTENANCE AND CLEANING Not applicable.  
 
9 CALIBRATION  Not applicable.  
 
10 CALCULATION OF RESULTS AND REPORTING Not applicable. 
  
11 ARCHIVING  
 
As demanded by study plan and test system guidelines 
 
12 REFERENCES  
Akvakulturforskriften: FOR-2008-06-17-822 Forskrift om drift av akvakulturanlegg 
(akvakulturdriftsforskriften) 
Document -ID 17423. SOP X58 Use of climate rooms 
Document -ID x. SOP Chlorination of waste water from test organisms