ID: xxx. Versjon: 0 
Procedure – Handling routines and documentation of aquaculture 
activities 
 
Godkjent dato Nei 
Dokumentansvarlig Adam Lillicrap 
 
23.08.2020 19:34:36  
1/223.08.2020 19:34:36  
1 AREA OF USE 
 
 This SOP applies to the holding of test organisms obtained for GLP and non GLP testing 
which are cultured in-house as a test system and for organisms used directly in test.  
 
2 PRINCIPLES  
Healthy test organisms are a prerequisite for all successful organism testing. Therefore, 
handling and holding of test organisms and test systems should be documented. NIVA also 
has responsibilities according to Akvakulturforskriften regarding animal welfare. 
 
3 RESPONSIBILITY  
 
As per SOP responsible list (GLP 007 B001).  
 
4 DEFINITIONS  
 
PL=Project leader, PMSK=Personnel with special control responsibility 
Test system= NIVA in house culture of an organism 
Test organism=Specific batch of organisms designated for use in s specific test 
NIVA pro=An application where all deviation occurring at NIVA are documented and handled.  
 
5 CHEMICALS AND SOLUTIONS Not applicable. 
 
 6 INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT Not applicable  
 
7 PROCEDURE  
-All test organism and test systems should have «Chart», or a similar log file that states 
species, number of individuals (if possible), feeding regime and date of start of test or test 
system. Also note test or test system responsible person. With respect to fish also note age of 
fish, average weight of fish on arrival and source of fish. 
 
-Any observed deviations for animal welfare should be conveyed to PMSK and registered in 
the NIVA deviation system (NIVA pro). 
 
7.1 DAILY ROUTINES 
-Check for mortality and note in «Chart», unusual mortality should be notified to PL and 
PMSK. PMSK should evaluate situation and require corrective actions if relevant or contact 
veterinary assistance if relevant. The incidence should be described as a deviation in NIVA 
pro. 
 
- Perform feeding in accordance with study plan or test system requirements and note this in 
«Chart». 
 
-Ensure proper functioning of: Air flow, water flow, light regime, temperature. Rectify 
malfunctions and note in study plan or «Chart».  
 
ID: xxx. Versjon: 0 
Procedure – Handling routines and documentation of aquaculture 
activities 
 
Godkjent dato Nei 
Dokumentansvarlig Adam Lillicrap 
 
23.08.2020 19:34:36  
2/223.08.2020 19:34:36  
-Perform change of media in accordance with study plan or test system requirements and 
note in «Chart» 
 
7.2 Other documentation 
-For fish studies: All received fish should be accounted for, document number of fish used in 
test, number of fish dead and number of not used in test. Note what happens to fish not 
used in test: killed or kept in holding tanks for future use, if kept a responsible person for the 
fish must be appointed. Notes are filed in study book. 
 
-Chlorination of waste water from tests and holding tanks (SOP Chlorination) Date of 
chlorination is noted and filed in study book. 
 
-Cleaning: Cleaning of floors in climate rooms at least weekly or on demand. Cleaning of 
tanks according to study plan or test system procedure. Tanks from organisms in risk groups 
(SOP Chlorination) should be chlorinated.  
 
8 MAINTENANCE AND CLEANING see daily routines  
 
9 CALIBRATION Not applicable.  
 
10 CALCULATION OF RESULTS AND REPORTING Not applicable 
  
11 ARCHIVING  
All notes are archived according to test system procedure or in study book.  
 
12 REFERENCES  
Akvakulturforskriften: FOR-2008-06-17-822 Forskrift om drift av akvakulturanlegg 
(akvakulturdriftsforskriften) 
SOP Chlorination 
«Chart».=Chart-Holding tank log (Ø94).xlsx