Fra: Kutti, Tina[tina.kutti@hi.no]
Sendt: 20.11.2023 11:27:41
Til: Reiss, Katrin;Keeley, Nigel Brian[katrin.reiss@statsforvalteren.no;nigel.brian.keeley@hi.no]
Tittel: SV: Estimation of coral density - aquaculture 
Hi,
This issue has been discussed in the wider deep sea, sponge, coral scientific community for as 
long as I know. For a short while (when the community believed there was suffucient data) 
OSPAR has some general guidelines as to what would be required in terms on density and size 
to be considered a sponge ground/coral garden. In the last assessment these measures were 
removed due to the fact that for most coral gardens/sponge aggregation this information does 
not exist. We are working to  generate more knowledge though. 
Most that has been done in this field has been done because of the impact of bottom fishing on 
the habitats an therefore many guidelines (in the start) was based on by catch biomass. 
Now video is the main information. Last paper debating the theme concludes that sometimes a 
singel image can be enough to classify that spot as VME:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10576969/
If you use this paper as reference you can try to make an evaluation. 
I can just say that right now there is a consensus in the community that in some areas not very 
much information is needed to classify an area as VME.
TIna
Fra: Reiss, Katrin <katrin.reiss@statsforvalteren.no>
Sendt: mandag 20. november 2023 11.08.16
Til: Keeley, Nigel Brian; Kutti, Tina
Emne: Estimation of coral density - aquaculture 
 
Hei!
 
I am working with two fish farm cases where lots of corals have been found, and I have one quick 
question here:
When you calculate the densities of different coral or sponge species, what is the minimum area that 
must be covered in order to say something about the density? Would a 100 m transect be enough? Or 
does the area need to be much bigger in order to give such numbers?
 
I guess that depends a lot on the species. I am mainly interested in whether it is possible to say 
something about the density of a species on a smaller scale, e.g. in a certain direction from a farm. For 
example, if one species is found in quite high densities on one transect, is it good enough to call this area 
a potential coral garden, even though the area around this focus area was not covered in the survey?
 
I don’t need exact numbers here, I am more interested to understand whether this kind of nature type 
classification can be done on smaller scales (like different directions from a fish farm) or larger scale 
(such as the entire area around a farm). 
 
Med vennlig hilsen
Katrin Reiss
Seniorrådgiver
Telefon:
E-post:
Web:
75 53 16 95
katrin.reiss@statsforvalteren.no
www.statsforvalteren.no/no