Dokument-ID: xxx. Versjonsnummer: 1 
Procedure – Administrative SOP Receiving and Handling Organisms 
for Studies 
 
Sist godkjent dato 2022 (Adam Lillicrap) 
Dokumentansvarlig Maria Hultman 
 
27.04.2022 
11:20:38  
1/327.04.2022 
11:20:38  
1/327.04.2022 11:20:38  
1 AREA OF USE 
 This SOP applies to the acquisition, receipt and holding of test organisms obtained for GLP tests and 
non GLP tests which are not routinely cultured in-house. It can also be applied for the receipt of test 
organisms for establishing new cultures at NIVA.  
2 PRINCIPLES  
Certain test organisms (for example, polychaete Arenicola marina or zebrafish embryos) need to be 
obtained from reputable suppliers and brought in to the NIVA laboratory to perform the respective 
test. This SOP details the procedure for acquisition, receipt and handling of these test organisms. This 
SOP also applies in the case of receiving animals for establishing new cultures. Proper conditions 
should be established and maintained for the storage, housing, handling and care of biological test 
systems, in order to ensure the quality of the data. 
3 RESPONSIBILITY  
As per SOP responsible list (GLP 007 B001).  
4 DEFINITIONS  
PL=Project leader, PMSK=Personnel with special control responsibility 
5 CHEMICALS AND SOLUTIONS Not applicable. 
 6 INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT Not applicable  
7 PROCEDURE  
7.1 PROCEDURE FOR AQUIRING TEST ORGANISMS FROM SUPPLIERS OR THE FIELD  
Animals that are not maintained as part of the inhouse cultures at NIVA may be brought in to the 
laboratory for use in GLP- or non GLP studies from known reliable sources (i.e. commercial suppliers 
or collected in field). In both cases, appropriate documentation should be sought from the 
supplier/collector to confirm the species identity. Transport of field collected/supplied animals 
should be in appropriate containers, ensuring the welfare of the organism during transport, provided 
by the supplier/collector. Sufficient preparation and communication between supplier and NIVA 
regarding the transport itinerary and condition, breeding history (if applicable), dietary background 
and health status (veterinary certificate if applicable) should take place before shipment. On arrival 
at the laboratory details of the source should be recorded in the study book, information to be 
included may be e.g. types of containers the animals were shipped in, salinity of water and 
temperature on arrival, physical appearance (e.g. injuries or abnormalities) and time of travel to the 
laboratory. Confirmation of size, age or other relevant parameters will be sought from the supplier as 
appropriate. 
Fish  and decapoda arrival must be agreed by PMSK prior to purchase. Information on species, 
average weight and number of animals is communicated to PMSK, who keeps a register (Bilag 
Dokument-ID: xxx. Versjonsnummer: 1 
Procedure – Administrative SOP Receiving and Handling Organisms 
for Studies 
 
Sist godkjent dato 2022 (Adam Lillicrap) 
Dokumentansvarlig Maria Hultman 
 
27.04.2022 
11:20:38  
2/327.04.2022 
11:20:38  
2/327.04.2022 11:20:38  
Recording test organism use), this in an excel sheet for later reporting to Mattilsynet. Only previously 
approved species (requiring animal experimental registration) by Mattilsynet are held at NIVA.   
7.2 PROCEDURE FOR RECEIVING AND HOLDING ORGANISMS  
Newly received organisms for test systems should be isolated until their health status has been 
evaluated. If any unusual mortality or morbidity occurs, this lot should not be used in studies and, 
when appropriate, should be humanely terminated. Unusual mortality/morbidity is assessed by the 
individual receiving the animals and is based on experience and personal judgement.  
Examples: 
Polychaete Arenicola: the presence of haemolymph (pink coloration in the supplied water) may 
indicate mortality in the supplied batch, therefore a decision is made if the animals are suitable for 
continued acclimation and testing.  
Fish: In the case of fish/embryos, their health and welfare must be checked upon arrival by suitably 
trained and experienced staff. At the experimental starting date of a study, test systems should be 
free of any disease or condition that might interfere with the purpose or conduct of the study. Test 
systems that become diseased or injured during the course of a study should be isolated or 
euthanized, as appropriate, after consultation with PMSK. Any diagnosed disease before or during a 
study and any precautionary steps (e.g. isolation of test animals) should be recorded. Records of 
general health, appearance, abnormal swimming behavior or mortality of test systems should be 
maintained. The acceptance criteria should be included in the study plan, and a written confirmation 
of acceptance should be included in the study book. This criterion is dependent on the species of 
concern, for example the swimming and avoidance behavior, pigmentation, and coloration of fish 
species, is proposed as important acceptance criterion for the general health of the animals, while 
this would not be applicable for zebrafish embryos. In all cases, mortality should not exceed < 10% in 
the supplied batch. The acceptance criteria is based on both mortality observed on receipt as well as 
during the acclimation period.  
In the case of establishment of new test cultures at NIVA, this information will be stored with the 
culture records. Biological test systems should be acclimatized to the test environment for an 
adequate period before the first administration/application of the test or reference item. The 
procedure for acclimatization should be described in the study plan in the section for “Test 
Organisms” Document # 17612 Bilag GLP Study Plan. All information needed to properly identify the 
test systems should appear on their housing or containers. Individual test systems that are to be 
removed from their housing or containers during the conduct of the study should bear appropriate 
identification, wherever possible. During use, housing or containers for test systems should be 
cleaned and sanitised at appropriate intervals. Any material that comes into contact with the test 
system should be free of contaminants at levels that would interfere with the study.  
7.3 Handling requirements according to “akvakulturforskriften” 
 
Fish and decapoda should be held in an environment (salinity, temperature and light:dark 
regime) that is suitable for the species, ensuring good animal welfare.  
Dokument-ID: xxx. Versjonsnummer: 1 
Procedure – Administrative SOP Receiving and Handling Organisms 
for Studies 
 
Sist godkjent dato 2022 (Adam Lillicrap) 
Dokumentansvarlig Maria Hultman 
 
27.04.2022 
11:20:38  
3/327.04.2022 
11:20:38  
3/327.04.2022 11:20:38  
 
Animals should not be handled unnecessary. Any handling including use of net, sieve and 
pumping should be performed with care and in a tempo that does not induce stress. Time 
out of the water should be minimized.  
 
Any transport of fish from one room to another should be performed with buckets and not 
in a sieve. 
 
In general maximum biomass of animals should be 25g/liter during holding period. Airing of 
holding tanks should be the standard requirement. Standard test guidelines may give other 
limits and should then be followed. 
8 MAINTENANCE AND CLEANING Not applicable.  
9 CALIBRATION Not applicable.  
10 CALCULATION OF RESULTS AND REPORTING Not applicable  
11 ARCHIVING  
All data regarding receipt and holding of test organisms will be archived with the study file.  
12 REFERENCES  
FOR-2008-06-17-822 Forskrift om drift av akvakulturanlegg (akvakulturdriftsforskriften) 
Document # 17612 Bilag GLP Study Plan 
Document # 17819 Bilag GLP Receipt test organism 
Document #  x  x Bilag Recording test organisms use